0.8.22 release blog post (#54)
ethereum/solidity-website: src/posts/2023-10-24-solidity-0.8.22-release-announcement.md

---
title: 'Solidity 0.8.22 Release Announcement'

> date: '2023-10-24'

Reviewer: The file name still has the old date: `2023-10-24-solidity-0.8.22-release-announcement.md`.

That's pretty important because it will become a part of the URL when the blog post is published.

author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

We are excited to announce the latest release of the Solidity Compiler 0.8.22. This newest version of the compiler includes a range of language as well as compiler improvements such as file-level event definitions, optimizations for unchecked loop increments, support for importing EVM assembly JSON, & more.

## Important Note

This release deprecates support for EVM versions older than Constantinople for the reason of ruling out the need to maintain multiple complex code paths or workarounds for ancient EVM versions. In case you rely on the support for such EVM versions, please reach out to us.

## Notable New Features & Fixes

### Unchecked loop increments

The usage of unchecked arithmetics for incrementing for loop counters is common for the purpose of gas optimizations. Let’s take the example of the following for loop with the counter `i`:

> ```

Author: Thanks, that's good to note!

for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) {
    ...

>     // i is not modified by the loop body

Reviewer 2: You really think so :-)?

>     // i is not modified by the loop body

Reviewer: Yeah, I mean, the full example would actually be even simpler and shorter than reading the comment there :)

>     // i is not modified by the loop body

Reviewer 2: But what kind of example would you imagine there :-)?
The simplest example is an empty for-loop... almost anything other than that would require surrounding code... at least I'd be quite fine with keeping it as is in any case :-).

>     // i is not modified by the loop body

Reviewer 2: Ok, yeah, maybe that's actually better :-).

In contrast, the new optimization enables users to write the for loop body as usual and the compiler will do the rest:

```
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) { // loop body }
```

Let’s understand all the conditions under which this optimization may be applied:

* Local variable as loop counter
only works with builtin operators “<” and  “++” used in the loop condition and increment, respectively. It does not apply to user-defined operators.
* Counter loop must be of type integer
* The loop counter may not be modified outside of the increment expression
* The variable on the left-hand-side of the condition must be the same one that is incremented by the loop expression
* The loop counter (in our example, `i`) must have at most the same bit width as the one with which it is being compared (in our example, `x`).

The optimization step is turned on by default when the optimizer is enabled. However, it can be turned off separately via Standard JSON input by setting the flag `simpleCounterForLoopUncheckedIncrement` to false.

### Adding support for importing EVM Assembly JSON

> This new release adds support for importing EVM assembly JSON further allowing us to perform experimental super-optimizations on assembly. The main purpose of this feature is to define a serialization format for importing EVM assembly that enables an Assembly object to be exported, modified, and re-imported while producing the exact same bytecode as compiling directly to bytecode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new release adds experimental support for importing EVM assembly, opening the possibility
for external tools to perform super-optimizations just before the bytecode is emitted.
The main purpose of this feature is to define a serialization format for the low-level EVM assembly
that enables the assembly produced by the compiler be exported, modified, and re-imported, resuming
the normal compilation process.
```

### Fixed NatSpec ICE thrown while emitting foreign events

> This release fixes a bug resulting in an error during NatSpec generation for events from a foreign contract or interface. In the previous release (0.8.21), the Solidity compiler added support for qualified access to events defined in contracts and interfaces that the current contract does not inherit from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release fixes a bug resulting in an error during NatSpec generation for code that emits events defined in foreign contracts or interfaces. In the previous release (0.8.21), the Solidity compiler added support for qualified access to events defined in contracts and interfaces that the current contract does not inherit from, but the bug prevented the full use of the feature.
```

Author: Sorry about the merge conflict. Added these edits in the final version.

0.8.22 fixes this bug and as a result, enables users to compile the following example without any errors:

> ```
> library   L { event EL(); }
> interface I { event EI(); }
> contract  C { event EC(); }
> contract  D { event ED(); }
> 
> contract E is D {
>     event EE();
> 
>     function foo() public {
>         emit L.EL();
>         emit I.EI();
>         emit C.EC();
>         emit ED();
>         emit EE();
>     }
> }
> ```

Reviewer: I think we can simplify it to focus only on the things that were actually broken:

````suggestion
```solidity
interface I { event ForeignEvent(); }
contract  C { event ForeignEvent(); }

contract D {
    function f() public {
        emit I.ForeignEvent();
        emit C.ForeignEvent();
    }
}
```
````

Author: Yes, that's better!

## Language Features

### Allowing event definition at file level

> Solidity 0.8.22 allows you to define events at the file-level. This feature allows you to define events outside of the scope of a smart contract without having to define a library.

Reviewer: How about this?
```suggestion
Solidity 0.8.22 allows you to define events at the file level.
Event definitions can now be placed outside of the contract scope.
This adds another option for code organiation, removing the need to artificially wrap events in
libraries.
```

Author: Yes, will add this in. Daniel also suggested we throw in the NatSpec ICE fix under this feature description and modify the example to explain that with the bugfix and this feature, both foreign events as well as file-level event definitions work out perfectly.

Reviewer: Yeah. We should really group them.

> ## Compiler Features

Reviewer: This is a part of the changelog. Should be inside the `Full Changelog` section.

Actually, should we also include the changelog bit that lists the language features?

Author: Okay, yeah I used the previous release blog post as reference but I noticed that the format (with the different sub-sections) varies slightly between  the changelog, release and release blog posts. Maybe it's better to streamline that for the next one to avoid repetition or worse, missing details. :)

Reviewer: It mostly depends on who was responsible for the blog post at the time. Also, the format was pretty static for a long time, and then we started shaking it up a bit more over the last 2-3 releases.

Overall, if you have your own ideas for how it should be written, feel free to experiment and we'll comment on that. The important thing is that the major elements should be there, and that the current format is mostly good enough already, so I would not expect any revolutionary changes, just small refinements.

I pointed this change specifically because it looks more accidental than as a deliberate change of the format.

Author: That makes sense!

I don't think there's a ton of changes necessary in the current version. And I'm happy to move the language and compiler features down under the full changelog section.

I agree that the way it's done right now, looks more of an accident than intentional. And that way once changed as per your suggestion, it will also reflect the changelog and release format structure. :)

* SMTChecker: Support user-defined operators.
* Yul Optimizer: If PUSH0 is supported, favor zero literals over storing zero values in variables.
* Yul Optimizer: Run the Rematerializer and UnusedPruner steps at the end of the default clean-up sequence.

## Full Changelog

### Bugfixes

* Code Generator: Fix output from via-IR code generator being dependent on which files were discovered by import callback. In some cases, a different AST ID assignment would alter the order of functions in internal dispatch, resulting in superficially different but semantically equivalent bytecode.
* NatSpec: Fix internal error when requesting userdoc or devdoc for a contract that emits an event defined in a foreign contract or interface.
* SMTChecker: Fix encoding error that causes loops to unroll after completion.
* SMTChecker: Fix inconsistency on constant condition checks when while or for loops are unrolled before the condition check.
* Yul Optimizer: Fix replacement decisions during CSE being affected by Yul variable names generated by the compiler, resulting in different (but equivalent) bytecode in some situations.

### AST Changes

> AST: Fix wrong initial ID for Yul nodes in the AST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* AST: Fix wrong initial ID for Yul nodes in the AST.
```

## How to install/upgrade?

To upgrade to the latest version of the Solidity Compiler, simply follow the installation instructions available in our documentation. Our team has made sure to provide detailed and straightforward steps to make the upgrade process as seamless as possible. If you have any questions or run into any issues during the upgrade process, don't hesitate to reach out to our community Matrix channel.

You can download the new version of Solidity here: v0.8.22. If you want to build from the source code, do not use the source archives generated automatically by GitHub, instead please use solidity_0.8.22.tar.gz and take a look at our documentation on how to build from source if you need guidance.

> Please note that for those using Solidity versions below 0.8.0, there are breaking changes. We highly recommend reviewing the detailed list of breaking changes in our documentation to ensure a smooth upgrade process. Additionally, we encourage all Solidity users to regularly check for updates to stay up-to-date with the latest improvements and optimizations. We advise all Solidity developers to upgrade to version 0.8.22 to take advantage of these improvements and optimizations.

Reviewer: I think this section is missing links that we usually include here, like links to source, release or the matrix channel. Actually, links are probably missing from the intro paragraph at the top too.

Author: Yes, thanks for catching that. I just haven't pushed some of the local changes I made this morning to the draft yet that include the links needed at the top and in this section. :)

Author: Updated!

## Important Note

This release deprecates support for EVM versions older than Constantinople, which are becoming
increasingly hard to maintain.
These ancient versions have long been obsolete on the Ethereum mainnet and testnets and we suspect
that they are no longer relevant for other networks as well. The complex code paths and workarounds
slow down the development and testing of features targeting the new versions and we would like to
stop supporting them in the future versions of the compiler. In case you rely on the support for
such EVM versions, please reach out to us.

## Notable New Features & Fixes

### Unchecked loop increments

The usage of unchecked arithmetic for incrementing `for` loop counters is common for the purpose of gas optimizations. Let’s take the example of the following for loop with the counter `i`:

```solidity
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) {
    ...
    // i is not modified by the loop body
}
```

> Considering that `x` is an expression with a known value to the programmer, such as an array size, a literal or even the return of a function, it is generally safe to assume that `i`  doesn't overflow because instead the loop eventually stops before that. In such a case, safety checking the counter would be redundant and wastes gas. This leads to a verbose pattern which wraps the counter increment in an unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a lot of cases (see below for precise conditions), the comparison will ensure that `i` never reaches the maximal value of its type and it is generally safe to assume that `i`  doesn't overflow because instead the loop eventually stops before that. In such a case, safety checking the counter would be redundant and wastes gas. This leads to a verbose pattern which wraps the counter increment in an unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body:
```

```
for(uint i = 0; i < x;) {
    ...
    unchecked { i++; } // i gets incremented without overflow checks -- less gas used
}
```

Solidity 0.8.22 introduces an overflow check optimization that automatically generates an unchecked arithmetic increment of the counter of for loops. This new optimization removes the need for poor unchecked increment patterns in for loop bodies such as the one illustrated in the previous example. 

In contrast, the new optimization enables users to write the for loop body as usual and the compiler will do the rest:

```
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) { // loop body }
```

Let’s understand all the conditions under which this optimization may be applied:

* Local variable as loop counter
only works with builtin operators “<” and  “++” used in the loop condition and increment, respectively. It does not apply to user-defined operators.
* Counter loop must be of type integer
* The loop counter may not be modified outside of the increment expression
* The variable on the left-hand-side of the condition must be the same one that is incremented by the loop expression

> * The loop counter (in our example, `i`) must have at most the same bit width as the one with which it is being compared (in our example, `x`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The precise conditions under which the new optimization avoids the overflow are the following:
* The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < ...`` for a local variable `i` (called "loop counter" from now on).
* This comparison must be performed in the same type as the loop counter, i.e. the type of the right-hand-side must be implicitly convertible to the type of the loop counter, such that the loop counter is not implicitly widened before comparing.
* The loop expression must be a prefix or postfix increment of the loop counter, i.e. i++ or ++i.
* The loop counter may not be modified in the loop condition or the loop body.

To clarify the second condition, consider the following counterexample:
In ``for (uint8 i = 0; i < uint16(1000); ++i) {}``, `i` is converted to `uint16` before the comparison and the condition is in fact never false, so the overflow check for the increment cannot be removed.
```

Author: Sorry about the merge conflict. Added these edits in the final version.

## Important Note

This release deprecates support for EVM versions older than Constantinople, which are becoming
increasingly hard to maintain.
These ancient versions have long been obsolete on the Ethereum mainnet and testnets and we suspect
that they are no longer relevant for other networks as well. The complex code paths and workarounds
slow down the development and testing of features targeting the new versions and we would like to
stop supporting them in the future versions of the compiler. In case you rely on the support for
such EVM versions, please [reach out to us](https://matrix.to/#/#ethereum_solidity-dev:gitter.im).

## Notable New Features

### Unchecked loop increments

The usage of unchecked arithmetic for incrementing `for` loop counters is common for the purpose of gas optimizations. Let’s take the example of the following for loop with the counter `i`:

```solidity
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) {
    ...
    // i is not modified by the loop body
}
```

> In a lot of cases (see below for precise conditions), the comparison will ensure that `i` never reaches the maximal value of its type and it is generally safe to assume that `i`  doesn't overflow because instead the loop eventually stops before that. In such a case, safety checking the counter would be redundant and wastes gas. This leads to a verbose pattern which wraps the counter increment in an unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a lot of cases (see below for precise conditions), the comparison will ensure that `i` never reaches the maximal value of its type and it is thus generally safe to assume that `i`  will not overflow, as the loop will stop before that. In such a case, safety checking the counter would be redundant and a waste of gas. This leads to a verbose pattern which wraps the counter increment in an unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body:
```

```
for (uint i = 0; i < x;) {
    ...
    unchecked { i++; } // i gets incremented without overflow checks -- less gas used
}
```

Solidity 0.8.22 introduces an overflow check optimization that automatically generates an unchecked arithmetic increment of the counter of `for` loops. This new optimization removes the need for poor unchecked increment patterns in `for` loop bodies such as the one illustrated in the previous example. 

In contrast, the new optimization enables users to write the `for` loop body as usual and the compiler will do the rest:

```
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) { // loop body }
```

The precise conditions under which the new optimization avoids the overflow check are the following:

* The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < ...`` for a local variable `i` (called "loop counter" from now on).

> * This comparison must be performed in the same type as the loop counter, i.e. the type of the right-hand-side must be implicitly convertible to the type of the loop counter, such that the loop counter is not implicitly widened before comparing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* This comparison must be performed on the same type as the loop counter, i.e. the type of the right-hand-side must be implicitly convertible to the type of the loop counter, such that the loop counter is not implicitly widened before comparing.
```

> * The loop expression must be a prefix or postfix increment of the loop counter, i.e. i++ or ++i.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The loop expression must be a prefix or postfix increment of the loop counter, i.e. ``i++`` or ``++i``.
```

* The loop counter may not be modified in the loop condition or the loop body.

To clarify the second condition, consider the following counterexample:
In ``for (uint8 i = 0; i < uint16(1000); ++i) {}``, `i` is converted to `uint16` before the comparison and the condition is in fact never false, so the overflow check for the increment cannot be removed.

The optimization step is turned on by default when the optimizer is enabled. However, it can be turned off separately via Standard JSON input by setting the flag `simpleCounterForLoopUncheckedIncrement` to false.

### Adding support for importing EVM Assembly JSON

This new release adds experimental support for importing EVM assembly, opening the possibility
for external tools to perform super-optimizations just before the bytecode is emitted.
The main purpose of this feature is to define a serialization format for the low-level EVM assembly
that enables the assembly produced by the compiler be exported, modified, and re-imported, resuming
the normal compilation process.

## Full Changelog

> ### Language Features

Reviewer: Now there's too much in this section :)

IMO, the `Full Changelog` section is simply meant to be a copy of the changelog. By including language features I meant copying that part here from the changelog in the repo, rather than moving the feature descriptions. Blurbs written specifically for the blog post should remain outside of it.

**Allowing event definition at file level**

Solidity 0.8.22 allows you to define events at the file level.
Event definitions can now be placed outside of the contract scope.

> This adds another option for code organiation, removing the need to artificially wrap events in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This adds another option for code organisation, removing the need to artificially wrap events in
```

```
for (uint i = 0; i < x;) {
    ...
    unchecked { i++; } // i gets incremented without overflow checks -- less gas used
}
```

Solidity 0.8.22 introduces an overflow check optimization that automatically generates an unchecked arithmetic increment of the counter of `for` loops. This new optimization removes the need for poor unchecked increment patterns in `for` loop bodies such as the one illustrated in the previous example. 

In contrast, the new optimization enables users to write the `for` loop body as usual and the compiler will do the rest:

```
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) { // loop body }
```

The precise conditions under which the new optimization avoids the overflow check are the following:

* The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < ...`` for a local variable `i` (called "loop counter" from now on).

> * This comparison must be performed on the same type as the loop counter, i.e. the type of the right-hand-side must be implicitly convertible to the type of the loop counter, such that the loop counter is not implicitly widened before comparing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This comparison must be performed on the same type as the loop counter, i.e. the type of the right-hand-side must be implicitly convertible to the type of the loop counter, such that the loop counter is not implicitly widened before comparing.
* The type of the loop counter must be a builtin integer type.
```

slow down the development and testing of features targeting the new versions and we would like to
stop supporting them in the future versions of the compiler. In case you rely on the support for
such EVM versions, please [reach out to us](https://matrix.to/#/#ethereum_solidity-dev:gitter.im).

## Notable New Features

### Unchecked loop increments

The usage of unchecked arithmetic for incrementing `for` loop counters is common for the purpose of gas optimizations. Let’s take the example of the following for loop with the counter `i`:

```solidity
for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) {
    ...
    // i is not modified by the loop body
}
```

In a lot of cases (see below for precise conditions), the comparison will ensure that `i` never reaches the maximal value of its type and it is thus generally safe to assume that `i`  will not overflow, as the loop will stop before that. In such a case, safety checking the counter would be redundant and a waste of gas. This encourages users to bypass the check using a verbose pattern which wraps the counter increment in an unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body:

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```solidity
````

* NatSpec: Fix internal error when requesting userdoc or devdoc for a contract that emits an event defined in a foreign contract or interface.
* SMTChecker: Fix encoding error that causes loops to unroll after completion.
* SMTChecker: Fix inconsistency on constant condition checks when while or `for` loops are unrolled before the condition check.
* Yul Optimizer: Fix replacement decisions during CSE being affected by Yul variable names generated by the compiler, resulting in different (but equivalent) bytecode in some situations.

### AST Changes

* AST: Fix wrong initial ID for Yul nodes in the AST.

## How to install/upgrade?

To upgrade to the latest version of the Solidity Compiler, simply follow the [installation instructions](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.22/installing-solidity.html) available in our documentation. Our team has made sure to provide detailed and straightforward steps to make the upgrade process as seamless as possible. If you have any questions or run into any issues during the upgrade process, don't hesitate to reach out to our [community Matrix channel](https://matrix.to/#/#ethereum_solidity:gitter.im).

> You can download the new version of Solidity here: [v0.8.22](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.22). If you want to build from the source code, do not use the source archives generated automatically by GitHub, instead please use solidity_0.8.22.tar.gz and take a look at our documentation on [how to build from source](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.22/installing-solidity.html#building-from-source) if you need guidance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can download the new version of Solidity here: [v0.8.22](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.22). If you want to build from the source code, do not use the source archives generated automatically by GitHub, instead please use [`solidity_0.8.22.tar.gz`](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/download/v0.8.21/solidity_0.8.22.tar.gz) and take a look at [our documentation on how to build from source](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.22/installing-solidity.html#building-from-source) if you need guidance.
```
